Question 1: What is the difference between ‘Paste’ and ‘Paste Special’ in Excel? Explain with examples.

Answer:

Paste copies and pastes everything from the copied cell, including values, formulas, formatting, borders, and comments.

Example:
If a cell contains the formula =A1+B1 with color formatting, using Paste will paste both the formula and formatting.

Paste Special allows you to choose what exactly you want to paste—such as values only, formulas only, formats, transpose data, or mathematical operations.

Example:

Paste Values: Pastes only the result of a formula, not the formula itself

Paste Formats: Pastes only cell formatting

Transpose: Converts rows into columns

Conclusion:
Paste Special provides greater control and flexibility compared to regular Paste.

Question 2: Describe the functions and usefulness of ‘Freeze Panes’ and ‘Split Panes’ in Excel.

Answer:

Freeze Panes keeps selected rows or columns visible while scrolling through large datasets.

Usefulness:

Keeps headers visible when scrolling

Improves data readability

Example:
Freezing the top row keeps column headers visible while scrolling down.

Split Panes divides the worksheet window into separate scrollable sections.

Usefulness:

Compare different parts of the same worksheet

View distant data simultaneously

Difference:
Freeze Panes locks rows/columns permanently, while Split Panes creates movable viewing sections.

Question 3: Difference between inserting a new row and inserting a new column. Can you insert multiple rows or columns at once?

Answer:

Insert Row: Adds a new horizontal row; shifts existing rows downward.

Insert Column: Adds a new vertical column; shifts existing columns to the right.

Yes, multiple rows or columns can be inserted at once by selecting multiple rows/columns first, then choosing Insert.

Example:
Selecting 3 rows and clicking Insert will add 3 new rows simultaneously.

Question 4: What are logical functions in Excel? Give examples.

Answer:

Logical functions perform decision-making operations based on conditions.

Examples:

IF Function

=IF(A1>=50,"Pass","Fail")


Use: Determines pass/fail based on marks.

AND Function

=AND(A1>50,B1>50)


Use: Checks if multiple conditions are true.

OR Function

=OR(A1>90,B1>90)


Use: Returns TRUE if any condition is true.

Question 5: Purpose of XLOOKUP and how it differs from VLOOKUP

Answer:

XLOOKUP is a modern lookup function that replaces VLOOKUP and HLOOKUP.

Advantages over VLOOKUP:

Searches both left and right

No column index number needed

Handles missing values better

Faster and more flexible

Example:

=XLOOKUP(A2,A:A,B:B)


VLOOKUP Limitation:
Can only search left-to-right and breaks if columns are inserted.

Question 6: Create ‘Employee Data’ worksheet (Formatted Table)

Answer:

Sample Data:
Name	Age	Department
Rahul	28	HR
Anita	32	Finance
Aman	25	IT
Neha	30	Marketing
Rohan	35	Sales
Formatting Applied:

Header row bold & center-aligned

Fill color applied to header

Columns auto-fitted



Question 7: Insert and delete multiple rows and columns

Answer:

Steps:

Select multiple rows or columns

Right-click → Insert / Delete

Excel adjusts data automatically

Question 8: Use Find and Replace to update department names

Answer:

Steps:

Press Ctrl + H

Find: IT

Replace with: Information Technology

Click Replace All

Question 9: Apply AVERAGE, MAX, MIN functions

Answer:

Dataset:
Values
10
25
40
15
30
Formulas Used:
=AVERAGE(A1:A5)
=MAX(A1:A5)
=MIN(A1:A5)

Question 10: Detecting and handling missing data in Excel

Answer:

As a Data Scientist, missing values must be identified and handled properly.

Tools Used:

Go To Special

Select blanks quickly

ISBLANK

=ISBLANK(A1)


Returns TRUE if cell is empty.

COUNTBLANK

=COUNTBLANK(A1:A10)


Counts missing values.

Handling Methods:

Remove blank rows

Replace with mean/median

Fill with “Not Available”

